---
title: A new ecosystem for maritime surveillance?
date: 2019-02-14
author_profile: true
layout: single
category: tech-demonstrator
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

A rethink of ground-level sensing payloads on existing buoys in the Arctic and European Sulphur Emission Control Areas (SECA).

{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/header.png" %}

<p style="font-size:15px;">
Ninety percent of the worlds trade is carried by sea, it is the lifeline of global commerce.
Due to global warming, the Arctic regions are seeing a significant increase in shipping
activity. The high sulphur content in the fuel oil puts the delicate ecosystem of the Arctic
at risk. An innovative sensing system is proposed that offers rendering of dynamic pollution maps using Automatic Identification System (AIS) data and environmental measurements. The system enables the unique correlation of ground-level atmospheric sensing
and AIS tracking, augmented by wider coverage Sentinel tropospheric column data. Furthermore, measures can be taken against specific vessels as the registration number of
the vessels is relayed via satellite upon exceeding certain emission thresholds based on
ship (engine) size. A preliminary hardware demonstrator has been developed that indicates a very high level of feasibility and encourages further development and testing. The
readings of the proposed sensing system offer enhancement of the Ship Traffic Emission
Assessment Model (STEAM) with real-life data as well as insights in Arctic fishing activities from a quota and emission point of view. Finally, the system allows monitoring of regions such as the North European Sulphur Emission Control Area (SECA) both from
a traffic and environmental point of view paving the way for sustainable shipping for
Europe and the rest of the World.
</p>

### 1 Introduction

<p style="font-size:15px;">
The Arctic are the few remaining regions of the Earth where the ecosystem is still relatively
preserved. However, over the years, declining Arctic ice coverage has resulted in a significant increase in shipping traffic as the Northeast and Northwest passages offer much shorter
distances between Europe and Asia as opposed to routes via the Panama and Suez canals [2].
The burning of heavy fuel oil with a high Fuel Sulphur Content (FSC) is a large contributor
to the SO2 emissions of the shipping industry and puts the Arctic regions at risk. A systematic lowering of the Sulphur content in the fuel oil has been put in place by the International
Maritime Organization (IMO). Zones have been defined, so called Emission Control Areas
(ECA), where the allowed Fuel Sulphur Content is limited to a certain amount [3].
The Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) presented results of global shipping emissions
in 2015 based on the Ship Traffic Emission Assessment Model (STEAM3), which uses Automatic Identification System (AIS) messages to describe the traffic activities of ships. The
STEAM3 model has been significantly improved by means of scaling the emissions to vessel size and type by using data assimilation techniques and cross correlating with vessel
registrations at the International Maritime Organization to get more accurate ship details and
therefore more accurate emission models. Figure 1 illustrates the modelled SOx emissions
by the shipping industry in 2015 as a result of the FMI study [1].
Shipping activity in the Arctic is expected to increase in the coming years as continued global
warming is opening up new shipping routes in the North. Combined with increased Russian
oil exploration activities in the area, this will again result in more heavy ship (tanker) traffic
between major European ports and the Arctic. It is therefore vital that efforts to monitor this
region are increased to preserve it in the coming decades.
</p>
{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/steam_model_sox.png" caption="Figure 1: Geographical distribution of modelled total SOx emissions from shipping in 2015 [1]" %}
<p style="font-size:15px;">
In order to prepare for the increase in shipping activity in the Arctic, extra methods should
be devised and put in place to pro actively monitor and to keep shipping sustainable. The
proposed solution is elaborated in the next chapter.
</p>

### 2 Solution

<p style="font-size:15px;">
A wide range of tropospheric data products are already available on the Sentinel satellites of
the Copernicus programme and have proven to be significantly contributing to the accuracy
of sea and land-based studies. These are primarily provided by the Tropospheric Monitoring
Instrument (TROPOMI) on Sentinel 5P [4]. However, extending the use of these datasets to
shipping emission monitoring calls for methods that provide data at much higher intervals
and spatial resolutions. Therefore a marine-terrestrial based sensing system is proposed that
offers higher sampling rates, augmenting Sentinel data.
Automatic Identification System (AIS) is a system which continuously broadcasts information about a vessel such as the position, speed, heading, callsign and registration number.
By monitoring this data it is possible to generate a digital map of all ship movements in the
nearby area. As AIS data is highly dynamic, the environmental data should also be of adequate availability, hence the argument for higher sampling rates.
At the same time, atmospheric data is gathered and logged. The atmospheric data consists
of environmental data (wind direction, wind speed, air pressure, temperature and humidity),
and chemical data (aerosol concentrations of several greenhouse gases). This concept is illustrated in figure 2.
</p>
{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/smartbuoy.png" caption="Figure 2: Smart buoy concept"%}
<p style="font-size:15px;">
By correlating the data in a smart way, it is possible to enhance the understanding of the
contribution of shipping emissions in the Arctic. Furthermore, since ship traffic is logged, it
is possible pinpoint polluting vessels. The exact method of data correlation and prediction is
illustrated in the next chapter.
</p>

#### 2.1 Theory of operation
<p style="font-size:15px;">
Logging AIS targets effectively translates into sampling a grid of vectors (ships) with each
their own direction and speed. At the same time a wind vector measurement is taken by
an anemometer. A model can be constructed by overlaying these two dynamic data-grids.
By propagating this model in the time domain, it is possible to determine the origin of an
increase in for example a SO2 reading and pinpoint it to a specific vessel with a certain confidence level. Several BMUs using the same algorithm can increase this confidence level.
This is illustrated in figure 3. Column A represents the AIS targets that are received by the
Buoy Mounted Unit (BMU), column B represents the wind vector measurement. Two grid
samples at different times (t1 and t2) are plotted. A rise in the SOx reading can now be traced
back to the old position of the vessel at t1 using previous AIS tracks and wind vector data.
</p>
{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/vectors.png" caption="Figure 3: AIS and wind vector grid time propagation theory of operation" %}
<p style="font-size:15px;">
Upon exceeding a certain emission threshold of a certain greenhouse gas, the system reports
the registration number of the vessel that most likely produced the emission according to the
propagated model. This operating scheme allows the International Maritime Organization to
take measures against specific vessels and/or shipping companies not adhering to emission
regulations.
</p>

### 3 Hardware demonstrator
<p style="font-size:15px;">
Certain hardware is needed in order to fulfill the tasks outlined in the solution section. A
preliminary hardware demonstrator has been developed to provide an indication of needed
hardware to comply with the mission requirements and to asses the feasibility from a hardware point of view. The following paragraphs illustrate how these systems will work and
how they are implemented.
</p>

#### 3.1 Connectivity
<p style="font-size:15px;">
An internal AIS receiver is used to register the positions of all the ships in the area. A Galileo
enabled receiver allows the buoy to precisely determine its position. This position data is also
used in the daily status reports it sends over satellite. The satellite messages are carried over
the Iridium NEXT network which offers excellent polar coverage. Since the buoy will be
located in very remote places, a satellite modem is vital for the system to be able to report its
status and receive operational commands. Remote commanding of the buoy is also possible
via satellite. A close-up view of the insides of the prototyped BMU are illustrated in figure
4. The AIS and Galileo receiver as well as the satellite modem are located in the top of the
unit. The bottom of the unit houses the embedded processor (Beagle Bone Black) and the
gas sensor array.
</p>
{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/unit_opened_compressed.jpg" caption="Figure 4: Electronics inside the prototyped BMU (Buoy Mounted Unit)" %}
<p style="font-size:15px;">
The unit can work standalone or be interfaced and synchronized to other instrumentation
systems using an Ethernet TCP/IP protocol. Operational commands can be executed via the
TCPIP or remotely via satellite.
</p>

#### 3.2 Sensors
<p style="font-size:15px;">
The gas sensor array is internally mounted and air is drawn through it using a long-life micropump. The sensor signals are acquired by the embedded processor and further processed.
The wind measurements are carried out with a marine anemometer. A prototype external
sensor array configuration is illustrated in figure 5.
</p>
{% include figure image_path="img/projects/2019-02-14-marine/antennas_annotated_compressed.jpg" caption="Figure 5: Prototype sensor array configuration showing the Galileo antenna (A), the AIS
receiver antenna (B), the anemometer (C), the air sampling tube (D) and finally the satellite
modem antenna (E)" %}

### 4 Expected results<br>
#### 4.1 Arctic trials
<p style="font-size:15px;">
Since the platform is intended to do monitoring in Arctic environments, initial testing campaigns would give a good indication whether or not the system is compatible with the harsh
Arctic environment and provides the desired results.
</p>

#### 4.2 Data
<p style="font-size:15px;">
Since the proposed BMU will provide data at higher sampling rate and spatial resolutions,
it will be easier to correlate it with dynamic AIS data. Emissions from large vessels along
shipping routes should clearly be visible in the readings, and through the vector grid propagation, be reported over satellite.
From the study of the Finnish Meteorological Institute, in excess of 300.000 vessels were
found to be non IMO-registered which complicates technical data to be included in the emission study. It is therefore impossible to determine how polluting these ships really are from
AIS data and technical database information alone, and therefore real-life measurements
must be taken by remote platforms. In the study, the distinction was also made between the
type of vessels. It was found that the largest contributor of Arctic shipping activity were
fishing vessels. Not all fishing vessels carry AIS equipment, and there fore could lead to
underestimates of shipping activity. As both AIS and environmental data are monitored, the
BMU should give a good idea of real-time fishing activities and this data can also be used to
compare with fishing quota to prevent over-fishing of the Northern regions.
</p>

### 5 Conclusion
<p style="font-size:15px;">
The proposed sensing buoy configuration offers precise ground level measurements. With
the ground-level augmented Copernicus data, the STEAM3 model can be greatly enhanced
offering a better insight in global fleet emissions and pave the way for a more sustainable
shipping industry for Europe and the rest of the World.
Not only does the BMU offer enhancements of the STEAM3 model, it also gives insight in
Arctic fishing activities both from a fishing quota and emission point of view contributing to
a long term sustainable fishing strategy.
Finally, the system allows legal measures to be taken against specific vessels as registration
numbers are logged and through vector grid propagation with the gas sensor readings, the
approximate emissions can be determined. The certainty can be improved by having multiple BMUs along the shipping routes performing the same grid propagation technique. By
placing additional units in the North European Sulphur Emission Control Area (SECA), this
region can additionally be monitored both from an AIS traffic and emission point of view.
</p>

{% include video id="U98Ua-LSyds" provider="youtube" %}

### 6 References

<p style="font-size:15px;">
[1] Lasse Johansson, Jukka-Pekka Jalkanen, and Jaakko Kukkonen. Global assessment of
shipping emissions in 2015 on a high spatial and temporal resolution. Atmospheric
Environment, 167:403–415, October 2017. ISSN 13522310. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.
2017.08.042. URL <a href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231017305563?via%3Dihub" target="_blank"> https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231017305563?via%3Dihub</a><br><br>

[2] Frederic Lasserre. Arctic Shipping: A Contrasted Expansion of a Largely Destinational
Market. In Matthias Finger and Lassi Heininen, editors, The GlobalArctic Handbook,
pages 83–100. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. ISBN 978-3-319-91994-2 978-3-319-91995-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-91995-9_6. URL <a href="http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-91995-9_6" target="_blank"> http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-91995-9_6</a><br><br>

[3] International Maritime Organization. Sulphur oxides (SOx) and Particulate Matter (PM) âA ¸S Regulation 14. URL <a href="https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/Pages/Sulphur-oxides-(SOx)-%E2%80%93-Regulation-14.aspx" target="_blank"> https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/Pages/Sulphur-oxides-(SOx)-%E2%80%93-Regulation-14.aspx</a><br><br>

[4] Mattia Pedergnana. Sentinel-5 precursor/TROPOMI Level 2 Product User Manual Sulphur Dioxide SO2. (01):158. URL <a href="https://sentinel.esa.int/documents/247904/2474726/Sentinel-5P-Level-2-Product-User-Manual-Sulphur-Dioxide" target="_blank"> https://sentinel.esa.int/documents/247904/2474726/Sentinel-5P-Level-2-Product-User-Manual-Sulphur-Dioxide</a><br><br>
</p>

Notice:
<p style="font-size:15px;">
This  paper  was  written  and  submitted  in  the  framework  of  the  ESA-EISC  Space  for  Sustainability  Award 2019  and  may  be  distributed  freely  in  print  or  electronic  forms. See <a href="https://www.space-sustainability-award.com/terms-conditions" target="_blank"> Terms  and  conditions</a>
This work additionally received funding from IEEE  New  Initiatives  Committee  (NIC)  and  the  Geoscience Remote Sensing Society (GRSS), project designator R4041.<br><br>

PDF version of this work available <a href="https://tommladenov.github.io/media/publications/81a602_09ef389a6765403898712ad760e1ef44.pdf" target="_blank"> here</a>
</p>
